README.md, before:

# Introduction to Software Development (ISD)

This repo provides a Maven version of the ISD labs for VS Code users. 

Make sure you first install:

- Java JDK (https://www.oracle.com/au/java/technologies/downloads/). In this sample project, we use Java 17.
- Maven (https://maven.apache.org/download.cgi) Select the **binary version** not Source. In this sample project, we use Maven 3.8.8. 

To Run The Project:

Open 2 terminals, side by side in VsCode:

Every time you make a change, run:

`mvn package`

In the other terminal, just run the following & leave it open for as long as you are developing:
`mvn jetty:run`

Then, open a web browser & visit: `http://localhost:8080`

To run unit tests: `mvn test`

## Install Maven

### Mac Users

Macos Users will need to edit their bash_profile file in ~/.bash_profile

Please add the following (Update the path to be wherever you downloaded the maven folder):

```
export M2_HOME="/Users/jack/Downloads/apache-maven-<version>"
PATH="${M2_HOME}/bin:${PATH}"
export PATH
```

You can confirm maven was succesfully installed by running `mvn` in your terminal.

### Windows Users

After installing Maven, search for environment variables in windows. This will open a dialogue like so:

![Alt text](images/env.PNG?raw=true 'Environment Variables')

Click the new button under system variables & add one called MAVEN_HOME with a link to the downloaded zip file:

![Alt text](images/systemvar.PNG?raw=true 'Environment Variables')

Find the PATH Variable under user variables & click edit. On the next screen, add a new entry with the value `%MAVEN_HOME%\bin`:

![Alt text](images/uservar.PNG?raw=true 'User Variables')

Close all the menus, reload a terminal window & you can confirm maven was succesfully installed by running `mvn` in your terminal.

## Connect with a database
You need to set up a local database. In this project, we are using the MariaDB, a popular open source relational databases. MariaDB is included as a dependency on pom.xml. The driver name is ```org.mariadb.jdbc.Driver```, and the default url is ```jdbc:mariadb://<host>:<port>/<database>```

Additionally, we also introduce MongoDB, a widely-used non-relational database. It stores data in json-like documents. You can either set up a local MongoDB server or use the remote MongoDB Atlas server which offers a free-tier option. We use version 5.3.0 for both the MongoDB Java Driver and BSON, and connect to MongoDB Atlas. On the MongoDBTest class, you can find an example of how we connect to the database and perform simple CRUD operations.

## Enable Servlets in a Maven project

### Add the Servlet API dependency

Servlets rely on the Java Servlet API, which is not part of the standard Java SE library. You need to include the Servlet API as a dependency in your Maven project.

```
<dependency>
    <groupId>javax.servlet</groupId>
    <artifactId>javax.servlet-api</artifactId>
    <version>4.0.1</version>
    <scope>provided</scope>
</dependency>
```

### Configure the project structure

A Servlet-based web application requires a specific directory structure (e.g., src/main/webapp for web resources like HTML, JSP, and WEB-INF).

```
src/
  main/
    java/       # Java source files (e.g., Servlets)
    resources/  # Configuration files (e.g., properties, XML)
    webapp/     # Web resources (e.g., HTML, JSP, CSS, JS)
      WEB-INF/  # Configuration files (e.g., web.xml)
```

### Set up a Servlet container

Servlets run inside a Servlet container (e.g., Apache Tomcat, Jetty). You need to configure your project to work with a Servlet container for deployment and testing. Add the below code in your pom.xml.

```
<plugin>
    <groupId>org.eclipse.jetty</groupId>
    <artifactId>jetty-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <version>${jettyVersion}</version>
    <configuration>
        <httpConnector>
            <port>8080</port>
        </httpConnector>
    </configuration>
</plugin>
```

### Write and configure Servlets

Create Servlet classes and configure them according to the workshop materials on Canvas.

# Acknowledgement
This project is based on the original repo: https://github.com/jiak1/ISDAutLab-VsCode. Thanks to @jiak1 for their work!

Commit message:

separated MongoDBTest into model and controller components

README.md, after:

# Introduction to Software Development (ISD)

This repo provides a Maven version of the ISD labs for VS Code users. 

Make sure you first install:

- Java JDK (https://www.oracle.com/au/java/technologies/downloads/). In this sample project, we use Java 17.
- Maven (https://maven.apache.org/download.cgi) Select the **binary version** not Source. In this sample project, we use Maven 3.8.8. 

To Run The Project:

Open 2 terminals, side by side in VsCode:

Every time you make a change, run:

`mvn package`

In the other terminal, just run the following & leave it open for as long as you are developing:
`mvn jetty:run`

Then, open a web browser & visit: `http://localhost:8080`

To run unit tests: `mvn test`

To run a specific class, for example, the MongoDBTest class of the tf.isd.controller package: `mvn exec:java -Dexec.mainClass="tf.isd.controller.MongoDBTest"`, you can also add the `-Dexec.cleanupDaemonThreads=false` option to prevent issues with backgroun threads.

## Install Maven

### Mac Users

Macos Users will need to edit their bash_profile file in ~/.bash_profile

Please add the following (Update the path to be wherever you downloaded the maven folder):

```
export M2_HOME="/Users/jack/Downloads/apache-maven-<version>"
PATH="${M2_HOME}/bin:${PATH}"
export PATH
```

You can confirm maven was succesfully installed by running `mvn` in your terminal.

### Windows Users

After installing Maven, search for environment variables in windows. This will open a dialogue like so:

![Alt text](images/env.PNG?raw=true 'Environment Variables')

Click the new button under system variables & add one called MAVEN_HOME with a link to the downloaded zip file:

![Alt text](images/systemvar.PNG?raw=true 'Environment Variables')

Find the PATH Variable under user variables & click edit. On the next screen, add a new entry with the value `%MAVEN_HOME%\bin`:

![Alt text](images/uservar.PNG?raw=true 'User Variables')

Close all the menus, reload a terminal window & you can confirm maven was succesfully installed by running `mvn` in your terminal.

## Connect with a database
You need to set up a local database. In this project, we are using the MariaDB, a popular open source relational databases. MariaDB is included as a dependency on pom.xml. The driver name is ```org.mariadb.jdbc.Driver```, and the default url is ```jdbc:mariadb://<host>:<port>/<database>```

Additionally, we also introduce MongoDB, a widely-used non-relational database. It stores data in json-like documents. You can either set up a local MongoDB server or use the remote MongoDB Atlas server which offers a free-tier option. We use version 5.3.0 for both the MongoDB Java Driver and BSON, and connect to MongoDB Atlas. On the MongoDBTest class, you can find an example of how we connect to the database and perform simple CRUD operations.

## Enable Servlets in a Maven project

### Add the Servlet API dependency

Servlets rely on the Java Servlet API, which is not part of the standard Java SE library. You need to include the Servlet API as a dependency in your Maven project.

```
<dependency>
    <groupId>javax.servlet</groupId>
    <artifactId>javax.servlet-api</artifactId>
    <version>4.0.1</version>
    <scope>provided</scope>
</dependency>
```

### Configure the project structure

A Servlet-based web application requires a specific directory structure (e.g., src/main/webapp for web resources like HTML, JSP, and WEB-INF).

```
src/
  main/
    java/       # Java source files (e.g., Servlets)
    resources/  # Configuration files (e.g., properties, XML)
    webapp/     # Web resources (e.g., HTML, JSP, CSS, JS)
      WEB-INF/  # Configuration files (e.g., web.xml)
```

### Set up a Servlet container

Servlets run inside a Servlet container (e.g., Apache Tomcat, Jetty). You need to configure your project to work with a Servlet container for deployment and testing. Add the below code in your pom.xml.

```
<plugin>
    <groupId>org.eclipse.jetty</groupId>
    <artifactId>jetty-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <version>${jettyVersion}</version>
    <configuration>
        <httpConnector>
            <port>8080</port>
        </httpConnector>
    </configuration>
</plugin>
```

### Write and configure Servlets

Create Servlet classes and configure them according to the workshop materials on Canvas.

# Acknowledgement
This project is based on the original repo: https://github.com/jiak1/ISDAutLab-VsCode. Thanks to @jiak1 for their work!
